Welcome to PyChem
=================

An introductory guide for people that would like to learn Python for
scientific (specifically chemical) applications. 

Why Choose Python?
------------------

There are many, many programming languages, so an obvious question is why we
will choose Python. First of all, it was designed with readability as a
primary goal. As such, Python code is easier to read than almost any other
programming language. Python has a minimal syntax with very few special
characters (brackets, semicolons, etc.), and it enforces some structural
uniformity, specifically indentation, to improve code appearance. A downside
of these structural rules is a minor lack of flexibility that can take some
getting used to; however, given some practice, these constructs will become
second nature.  This readability standard makes Python code extremely rapid to
write as well. This means that you will spend less time processing your
data and more time on interpretation and analyses.

In addition, Python comes with a standard interactive interpreter that allows
you to test code snippets and track what is happening to your data. This means
that you don't have to write your entire program to see if things are working.
You can check different segments of code and track the results without having
to do all of the work in advance. A third-party advanced interpreter
(:ref:`ipy`) is also available that takes the interactive coding experience to
a new level.

One of the most important aspects of Python, from our point of view, is its
large and active scientific user base. In my opinion, scientific users are
drawn by the advantages of Python outlined above, and the fact that it is open
source is important for future reproducibility (a fact that can sometimes be
overlooked when you are using proprietary software).  These users have
contributed huge amounts of freely-available code , which can be used as a
base for all of your scientific needs.  See :doc:`Appendix A
<./appendix_a/appendix_a>` for a partial listing of some of these third party
add-on packages for various scientific disciplines.

Contents
--------

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    intro
    why
    quick/quick
    writing
    ipython
    basics
    terms
    examples
    ftir/ftir
    nmr/nmr
    batch/batch
    sim/sim
    multid/multid
    multid2/distrib
    appendix_a/appendix_a


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`search`

.. * :ref:`modindex`

